README.md, before:

# End to End NLP Pipeline For AI-Generated Text Detection 

<p align="left">
  <!-- Core -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20With-Colab-blue?logo=googlecolab&logoColor=white" alt="Made with Colab">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Language-Python-blue?logo=python" alt="Language: Python">

  <!-- Emoji Icons -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/⚖️%20License-MIT-green" alt="License">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🐞%20Issues-GitHub-red" alt="Issues">

  <!-- Repo Stats -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/repo-size/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection?logo=github" alt="Repo Size">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection" alt="Last Commit">

  <!-- Models -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🤖%20Models-LR%20%7C%20SVM%20%7C%20RF%20%7C%20XGBoost%20%7C%20BiLSTM%20%7C%20DistilBERT-red" alt="Models">

  <!-- Explainability -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🔍%20Explainability-LIME%20%7C%20SHAP-purple" alt="Explainability">

  <!-- Visualization -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/📊%20Data%20Visualization-Matplotlib%20%7C%20Seaborn-yellow" alt="Visualization">

  <!-- Dataset -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dataset-Kaggle-blueviolet?logo=kaggle" alt="Dataset: Kaggle">
  <!-- GPU --> 
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Runtime-GPU%20(A100 | T4 | L4)-blue?logo=nvidia" alt="Runtime: GPU (A100 | Trillium)">

  <!-- Deployment -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Deployment-Gradio%20%7C%20HuggingFace-orange?logo=huggingface" alt="Deployment">

  <!-- DevOps -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Version%20Control-Git-orange?logo=git" alt="Git">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Host-GitHub-black?logo=github" alt="GitHub">

  <!-- Social -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/forks/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection?style=social" alt="Forks">

  <!-- Status -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Project-Deployed-brightgreen" alt="Status">
</p> 

![Dashboard](https://github.com/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-For-Human-vs-AI-Generated-Text-Classification-System/blob/main/Assets/ai_vs_human_title_mod.png?raw=true) 

## Overview 

The rapid progress of large language models has transformed text generation across education, media, and digital platforms, enabling AI systems (such as ChatGPT, Claude, and LLaMA) to produce content that closely mimics human writing. While these technologies provide significant benefits, they also bring forth challenges related to academic integrity, fake information, and content authenticity, making the reliable detection of AI-generated text harder than ever. This capstone project addresses the problem of AI vs human text classification by exploring several machine learning–based systems that distinguish between human-written and AI-generated content using linguistic and stylistic patterns instead of source-specific metadata. Multiple datasets of varying sizes were considered and finally integrated and preprocessed to ensure consistency and avoid data leakage. Several classical machine learning, RNN and transformer-based models were explored, with DistilBERT selected for its strong performance and computational efficiency. To enhance transparency and usability (rather than just theoretical exploration), the project includes a Hugging Face based [application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ShaikhBorhanUddin/AI_generated_text_detection) built with Gradio. Users can input text and receive predictions with confidence scores, along with word-level explanations generated through explainability methods such as LIME. The proposed system demonstrates a practical and interpretable approach to AI-generated text detection, with real-world applications in academic integrity, e-commerce review moderation, and social media content verification. 

## Business Use Cases 

In the age of the AI revolution, recruitment and hiring platforms focus on detecting AI-generated resumes, cover letters, and job applications used by candidates during the hiring process. Hence, this use case is particularly relevant for HR departments and recruitment platforms (such as LinkedIn, Glassdoor, and Indeed), where the rise of generative AI has enabled mass-produced applications that dilute the authenticity of candidate skills and qualifications. By identifying heavily AI-generated content, the model can assist recruiters in preserving genuine candidate communication, improving screening efficiency, and maintaining fairness in the hiring process, while serving as a support tool to enhance (but definitely not replace) human decision-making. 

Journalism & News Verification also addresses a similar growing challenge of identifying AI-generated news articles, opinion pieces, and other editorial content within modern media ecosystems. Newsrooms, fact-checking organizations, and media watchdogs can use this model to flag potentially synthetic or AI-written content that may contribute to misinformation or propaganda (political, religious, or racial). By integrating the model into editorial review workflows, it can support human verification processes, help maintain journalistic integrity, and ensure that published content meets credibility and ethical standards in an era of rapidly automated content generation. 

Academic Integrity & Education Technology (EdTech) can be another use case where focus is given on detecting AI-generated academic submissions such as essays, assignments, and reflective writing. Universities, online learning platforms (such as Coursera, edX, Udemy), and assessment or marking systems can use this model to help identify potentially AI-written (or heavily assisted) coursework. This capability is critical for preventing misuse of generative AI, supporting fair and consistent evaluation, and assisting instructors by flagging suspicious (AI-generated) submissions. Importantly, the model functions as a decision-support tool rather than an automated punishment system, enabling human educators to make informed and transparent academic integrity decisions. 

To implement these use cases, it is essential to follow a series of sequential steps: identifying suitable datasets, performing feature engineering, training and testing models, selecting the most appropriate model, and building and deploying a web interface. These processes are detailed in the following sections. 

## Folder Structure 

```bash
End to End NLP Pipeline For AI-Generated Text Detection
│
├── Assets/                       # Screenshots, visualizations and images for documentation
├── Dataset/               
│      ├── Raw/                   # Original dataset from Kaggle
│      ├── Preprocessed/          # Dataset with added features
│      ├── Cleaned/               # Cleaned and merged datasets
│      └── Feature Engineered/    # dataset with BoW, TF-IDF and word2vec features
├── Models/                       # All saved models
├── Notebooks/                    # Data preprocessing, EDA, train/test, result visualization
├── app.py                        # Code for deployment
├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies for deployment
├── README.md                     # Project documentation
└── Licence
```
## Project Workflow 

## Dataset, Cleaning & Pre-processing 

| **Column Name**      | **Data Type**    | **Description**                                                                 |
| -------------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **id**               | Integer          | Unique identifier for each record                                               |
| **label**            | String           | Indicates whether the content is generated by a *human* or *AI*                 |
| **topic**            | String           | Main subject category of the text (e.g., food, travel, education, sports, etc.) |
| **text**             | Text             | Actual written content or message                                               |
| **length_chars**     | Integer          | Number of characters present in the text                                        |
| **length_words**     | Integer          | Total word count of the text                                                    |
| **quality_score**    | Float            | Automated quality assessment score of the text                                  |
| **sentiment**        | Float            | Sentiment polarity score (negative to positive range)                           |
| **source_detail**    | String           | Origin of the text (e.g., human author ID or AI model name)                     |
| **timestamp**        | DateTime         | Date and time when the text was created                                         |
| **plagiarism_score** | Float            | Similarity score indicating potential plagiarism                                |
| **notes**            | String           | Additional remarks (e.g., personal tone, blank if none)                         |
 
## Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) for Text 

## Feature Engineering 

Due to fundamental architectural differences between classical machine learning models and transformer-based models, two separate preprocessing and feature engineering pipelines were implemented. Classical machine learning models and the BiLSTM network relied on explicitly engineered features, including Bag-of-Words and TF-IDF representations derived from cleaned and lemmatized text. In contrast, the DistilBERT model utilized minimal preprocessing and employed its native tokenizer to generate contextualized subword embeddings, allowing the model to learn linguistic features automatically through self-attention mechanisms. This separation ensures methodological correctness and fair model comparison. 

## Models 

## Tests 

## Evaluation 

## Explainability 

## Applications 

## Deployment 

To access the app click the [link](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ShaikhBorhanUddin/AI_generated_text_detection). 

## Limitations 

## Technologies Used 

## Future Developement 

## Licence 

## Contact

Commit message:

Document project workflow in README
Added detailed project workflow outlining dataset selection, data cleaning, preprocessing, EDA, feature engineering, model selection, training, evaluation, visualization, and deployment.

README.md, after:

# End to End NLP Pipeline For AI-Generated Text Detection 

<p align="left">
  <!-- Core -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20With-Colab-blue?logo=googlecolab&logoColor=white" alt="Made with Colab">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Language-Python-blue?logo=python" alt="Language: Python">

  <!-- Emoji Icons -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/⚖️%20License-MIT-green" alt="License">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🐞%20Issues-GitHub-red" alt="Issues">

  <!-- Repo Stats -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/repo-size/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection?logo=github" alt="Repo Size">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection" alt="Last Commit">

  <!-- Models -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🤖%20Models-LR%20%7C%20SVM%20%7C%20RF%20%7C%20XGBoost%20%7C%20BiLSTM%20%7C%20DistilBERT-red" alt="Models">

  <!-- Explainability -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/🔍%20Explainability-LIME%20%7C%20SHAP-purple" alt="Explainability">

  <!-- Visualization -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/📊%20Data%20Visualization-Matplotlib%20%7C%20Seaborn-yellow" alt="Visualization">

  <!-- Dataset -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dataset-Kaggle-blueviolet?logo=kaggle" alt="Dataset: Kaggle">
  <!-- GPU --> 
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Runtime-GPU%20(A100 | T4 | L4)-blue?logo=nvidia" alt="Runtime: GPU (A100 | Trillium)">

  <!-- Deployment -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Deployment-Gradio%20%7C%20HuggingFace-orange?logo=huggingface" alt="Deployment">

  <!-- DevOps -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Version%20Control-Git-orange?logo=git" alt="Git">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Host-GitHub-black?logo=github" alt="GitHub">

  <!-- Social -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/forks/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-for-AI-Generated-Text-Detection?style=social" alt="Forks">

  <!-- Status -->
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Project-Deployed-brightgreen" alt="Status">
</p> 

![Dashboard](https://github.com/ShaikhBorhanUddin/End-to-End-NLP-Pipeline-For-Human-vs-AI-Generated-Text-Classification-System/blob/main/Assets/ai_vs_human_title_mod.png?raw=true) 

## Overview 

The rapid progress of large language models has transformed text generation across education, media, and digital platforms, enabling AI systems (such as ChatGPT, Claude, and LLaMA) to produce content that closely mimics human writing. While these technologies provide significant benefits, they also bring forth challenges related to academic integrity, fake information, and content authenticity, making the reliable detection of AI-generated text harder than ever. This capstone project addresses the problem of AI vs human text classification by exploring several machine learning–based systems that distinguish between human-written and AI-generated content using linguistic and stylistic patterns instead of source-specific metadata. Multiple datasets of varying sizes were considered and finally integrated and preprocessed to ensure consistency and avoid data leakage. Several classical machine learning, RNN and transformer-based models were explored, with DistilBERT selected for its strong performance and computational efficiency. To enhance transparency and usability (rather than just theoretical exploration), the project includes a Hugging Face based [application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ShaikhBorhanUddin/AI_generated_text_detection) built with Gradio. Users can input text and receive predictions with confidence scores, along with word-level explanations generated through explainability methods such as LIME. The proposed system demonstrates a practical and interpretable approach to AI-generated text detection, with real-world applications in academic integrity, e-commerce review moderation, and social media content verification. 

## Business Use Cases 

In the age of the AI revolution, recruitment and hiring platforms focus on detecting AI-generated resumes, cover letters, and job applications used by candidates during the hiring process. Hence, this use case is particularly relevant for HR departments and recruitment platforms (such as LinkedIn, Glassdoor, and Indeed), where the rise of generative AI has enabled mass-produced applications that dilute the authenticity of candidate skills and qualifications. By identifying heavily AI-generated content, the model can assist recruiters in preserving genuine candidate communication, improving screening efficiency, and maintaining fairness in the hiring process, while serving as a support tool to enhance (but definitely not replace) human decision-making. 

Journalism & News Verification also addresses a similar growing challenge of identifying AI-generated news articles, opinion pieces, and other editorial content within modern media ecosystems. Newsrooms, fact-checking organizations, and media watchdogs can use this model to flag potentially synthetic or AI-written content that may contribute to misinformation or propaganda (political, religious, or racial). By integrating the model into editorial review workflows, it can support human verification processes, help maintain journalistic integrity, and ensure that published content meets credibility and ethical standards in an era of rapidly automated content generation. 

Academic Integrity & Education Technology (EdTech) can be another use case where focus is given on detecting AI-generated academic submissions such as essays, assignments, and reflective writing. Universities, online learning platforms (such as Coursera, edX, Udemy), and assessment or marking systems can use this model to help identify potentially AI-written (or heavily assisted) coursework. This capability is critical for preventing misuse of generative AI, supporting fair and consistent evaluation, and assisting instructors by flagging suspicious (AI-generated) submissions. Importantly, the model functions as a decision-support tool rather than an automated punishment system, enabling human educators to make informed and transparent academic integrity decisions. 

To implement these use cases, it is essential to follow a series of sequential steps: identifying suitable datasets, performing feature engineering, training and testing models, selecting the most appropriate model, and building and deploying a web interface. These processes are detailed in the following sections. 

## Folder Structure 

```bash
End to End NLP Pipeline For AI-Generated Text Detection
│
├── Assets/                       # Screenshots, visualizations and images for documentation
├── Dataset/               
│      ├── Raw/                   # Original dataset from Kaggle
│      ├── Preprocessed/          # Dataset with added features
│      ├── Cleaned/               # Cleaned and merged datasets
│      └── Feature Engineered/    # dataset with BoW, TF-IDF and word2vec features
├── Models/                       # All saved models
├── Notebooks/                    # Data preprocessing, EDA, train/test, result visualization
├── app.py                        # Code for deployment
├── requirements.txt              # Python dependencies for deployment
├── README.md                     # Project documentation
└── Licence
```
## Project Workflow 

The following workflow is maintained sequencially in this project. 

- Dataset selection from multiple sources to ensure diverse human and AI-generated text samples

- Data cleaning including duplicate removal and handling missing or noisy entries

- Text preprocessing with lowercasing, punctuation removal, tokenization, lemmatization, and stopword filtering

- Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) to analyze word count distributions, frequent terms, word clouds, bigram patterns, and linguistic complexity measures

- Feature engineering using Bag of Words (BoW), TF-IDF, and Word2Vec embeddings

- Model selection covering classical machine learning models, BiLSTM, and transformer-based DistilBERT

- Train-test splitting to ensure unbiased performance evaluation

- Model training with hyperparameter tuning and GPU acceleration

- Model evaluation using accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, ROC-AUC, and confusion matrices

- Result visualization and explaining with LIME and SHAP

- Deployment via a Gradio web application with real-time prediction, confidence scoring, and explainability support

## Dataset, Cleaning & Pre-processing 

| **Column Name**      | **Data Type**    | **Description**                                                                 |
| -------------------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **id**               | Integer          | Unique identifier for each record                                               |
| **label**            | String           | Indicates whether the content is generated by a *human* or *AI*                 |
| **topic**            | String           | Main subject category of the text (e.g., food, travel, education, sports, etc.) |
| **text**             | Text             | Actual written content or message                                               |
| **length_chars**     | Integer          | Number of characters present in the text                                        |
| **length_words**     | Integer          | Total word count of the text                                                    |
| **quality_score**    | Float            | Automated quality assessment score of the text                                  |
| **sentiment**        | Float            | Sentiment polarity score (negative to positive range)                           |
| **source_detail**    | String           | Origin of the text (e.g., human author ID or AI model name)                     |
| **timestamp**        | DateTime         | Date and time when the text was created                                         |
| **plagiarism_score** | Float            | Similarity score indicating potential plagiarism                                |
| **notes**            | String           | Additional remarks (e.g., personal tone, blank if none)                         |
 
## Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) for Text 

## Feature Engineering 

Due to fundamental architectural differences between classical machine learning models and transformer-based models, two separate preprocessing and feature engineering pipelines were implemented. Classical machine learning models and the BiLSTM network relied on explicitly engineered features, including Bag-of-Words and TF-IDF representations derived from cleaned and lemmatized text. In contrast, the DistilBERT model utilized minimal preprocessing and employed its native tokenizer to generate contextualized subword embeddings, allowing the model to learn linguistic features automatically through self-attention mechanisms. This separation ensures methodological correctness and fair model comparison. 

## Models 

## Tests 

## Evaluation 

## Explainability 

## Applications 

## Deployment 

To access the app click the [link](https://huggingface.co/spaces/ShaikhBorhanUddin/AI_generated_text_detection). 

## Limitations 

## Technologies Used 

## Future Developement 

## Licence 

## Contact
